It was quite an ambitious project.
It was fairly, yes.
You know, I mean, as so often happens, if I'd known what was ahead of me, I might not have taken it on.
But the truth was that I wanted to do a series about American art really since I finished Shock of the New, you know.
I think I wrote the first synopsis back in 82 or 83.
And then at the Beebe they didn't want to do it at first because they thought the day of the didactic miniseries was over.
And, you know, a dinosaur.
MTV was the coming thing.
So it was proposed as a television project and as a book.
Well, I proposed it to the Beebe as a television project, yes.
And, you know, obviously a book would have to come out of it because you don't make money off doing...
this sort of thing for the BBC.
Yeah, but this is not a little pre-season of a television program.
Oh, hell no.
It's a big-ass book.
No, it's a big-ass book.
And, you know, the television series was a great kind of sketch for the book, as it were.
But, you know, in the nature of television, you have to leave so much out.
I mean, eight hours of television time, though it sounds a lot,
Well, I figured 24,000 words.
You said 3,000 words.
Yeah, that's right, 24,000 words.
Well, that's the length of one chapter of the book.
That's right.
Yeah.
But the... And you see, I'd like... I mean, Cate Clark could reprint his script virtually verbatim, you know, and make the book civilization because the scripts were, you know, sort of much longer.
They were more in the nature of
these are films and so, you know, the word card, you know, allowing for interviews and so on and so forth is accordingly smaller.
And in any case, I'm terribly bad at writing short books.
Well, you mentioned some things where there was an interview or something that, 1,200 words a day, I guess,
I had to because the series ran over time in preparation.
My part in it didn't actually end until really the end of March 1996.
Jesus, that's how many of you are now.
Just about 14 months ago.
So I had to deliver the book by the beginning of December.
And, you know, although I'd sort of partially completed one chapter, it wasn't actually much good.
So that meant that I had to really, you know, write the whole thing from, you know, between Easter Sunday and... Did you see a whole?
I mean... Yeah, I did by the time that I got the television series finished.
As a matter of fact, I'd been seeing the basic story and the basic intent.
You know, I had pretty whole...
some years before the teleseries, but as you know, you never really work it out until you actually have to get down and do it.
And of course, to say that I saw the book, I'll even when I'd finished the television series.
Well, the project, let's say, the project.
Yeah, I think I did.
I think I did.
It's evolved.
It's audacious, really.
Well, you know, maybe I'm just long-winded, you know.
But see, you write a book, you know, you do this sort of work in order to find out, you know, it's a great error to suppose that writers, this writer, you know, have all their ducks in the line before they actually begin.
I mean, basically, you write about a large subject in order to find out about it.
You know, that was the case of, you know, Fatal Shore.
I mean, I'd never have dared take it on if I'd known whatnot.
Sure, the pleasure.
But, you know, it's... What can I say?
I mean, hubris has something to do with it.
It would also be, you know, maybe plain folly, but, you know, I think one should... I think the act of finding out as you go along, you know, the act of doing your research as you go along, doing all that reading and stuff, first of all, it forces you to think more intentionally
at the same time.
I mean, it just sort of forces your hand.
Well, you spent three years in the field, so to speak.
Three years in the field, six months aggregate in one week and ten day and two week hops.
But that was great, though, because you were actually able to go out and do the research for the book.
Well, that's correct.
And also, I was able to see a lot of stuff.
I mean, I saw an awful lot of
say, Winslow Homer's paintings, without having visited some of their motifs, that it enriches it to go to Proud's Neck and film there, you know.
In any case, I do what I wish you would like.
Get it right there.
At the time of the light, do what you like.
Ten minutes a day, didn't you?
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
And see, I think you're sort of right with more conviction
a lot of places I haven't visited, you know.
I mean, I've never, for instance, been to Monticello or to the University of Virginia, you know, the university designed by Jefferson near Charlottesville.
Charlottesville was one of my papers, by the way.
Was I?
My column runs in about 22 papers.
Oh, really?
Oh, my gosh.
And largely University towns.
Yes, yes.
It happens in Charlottesville.
Yeah.
Well, you see, I'd never, although, of course, I'd seen 2,000 photographs of Charlottesville to see it in a photo and to, you know, walk around.
Because Marcello, you're actually small when you see it.
It is.
I was just thinking of going through the book, that picture of fallen water, for instance.
That's...
I almost wonder if that house was designed just to be seen from that very point.
Well, as a matter of fact, it was designed to be seen.
Well, I don't know which kind, first the chicken or the egg, but the garden is arranged in the Japanese manner where you have a number of, as it were, pre-selected full views of the house from different angles.
But every photo I've ever seen of it always is from that vantage point.
Yeah, well, I guess...
I guess there's a reason for that.
A lot of... Because falling water, you've got to see the water.
Yeah, you've got to see the water.
It must have been an intolerable house to live in during the spring, you know.
That was irrelevant.
It was quite irrelevant as far as Wright was concerned, yeah.
And he covered it?
Well, Wright was not deeply concerned about that.
Yeah.
Would you say that you mentioned Fatal Shore, which was kind of a pay-in to your native country?
In a way, is this a similar kind of... A similar kind of thing to America, except, of course, the subject matter is very different.
I mean, in the case of Fatal Shore, I wanted to excavate the origins of the country, you know, which had been fairly sublimated by Australians, you know, because they were not by any means proud of their penal origins.
But...
Just as, you know, from studying that period, you get to get quite a few clues about what made Australians.
So I think that the basic project of writing this book, which is not so much formal history of American art, but to... I'm getting tired of re-quoting this phrase, but it's actually true, you know, to sort of see what you can tell about Americans and the things they've made.
There is something in common between the two.
Um, but the, the, uh, uh, of course this, you know, I mean, I think of it, I think, I think of this one as a book about America, but the primary evidence is in the art, whereas, uh, uh, Michael Shaw was, you know, about Australia and it really had very little to do with it.
Yeah, it was a narrative.
Yeah, it was a narrative, you know.
This was a
It amazes me that they managed to get it printed at that level of quality as quick as they did.
That's craft.
That's good up for you.
They're wonderful.
They only got one picture for Flott.
Which one is that?
Perhaps I shouldn't tell you.
It was the tumble signing of the Declaration of Independence.
But that's the only one.
I mean, there were a few that were caught at the last moment.
So they go to press again, they'll fix it, right?
Perhaps.
One hopes.
Yeah.
But, you know, there isn't an awful lot to fix.
There have been a few complaints that there's no bibliography.
Well, I have to say that concerns me, too, as opposed to much bibliography and notes.
Well, listen, the...
Perhaps it's because it was written at such speed, but also there are honourable precedents for this.
I mean, Civilisation didn't have a bibliography on that, and neither did... Is this stronger than Civilisation?
Well, I hope so.
I may say so.
I hope so, yeah.
I hope so.
I mean, I may, you know, for the second edition, actually the second printing is already underway, but for the third, whatever, when they republished before Christmas, I had been talking to them about maybe
putting in a bibliography.
That's what bothers you, then, a little bit.
It does bother me a little bit, but not terribly much.
You know, it's not intended as a scholarly book.
Well, you set this out at the very beginning.
You say you're hoping to reach, you know, that mythical creature of the intelligent reader, which may be an oxymoron.
I don't think it is an oxymoron.
I think there are an awful lot on there.
I'm writing a new book, by the way, that does...
have some attention paid to the reader.
Yeah.
Is there such a creature?
Well, let's hope.
Let's hope there are many thousand of them.
Yeah, well, this is a $65 book.
Yes, that's right.
And so how many did they print?
A hundred thousand.
Jesus.
But see, I mean, I don't think they print as many as a hundred thousand if there wasn't the television series coming out.
But nevertheless, that's
They're confident about it.
Yeah.
Well, you know, if that confidence is mistraced, then there's going to be an awful lot of trees that died in vain.
That's the way it goes, you know.
I have no idea what 100,000 copies of this thing weigh.
How much does this weigh?
How much is it?
About six pounds.
So 600,000 pounds divided by 2240, whatever that is.
That's 60,000.
Well, these books will... I don't foresee these books becoming insulation at any time soon.
I don't think so.
No, I think it's going to have a long shelf life.
I mean, my books tend not to go out of print.
I leave my old history of Australian art, which I read when I was 26.
or something.
Still in print, yeah.
After 30 years, yeah.
One of the things you point out is that we tend to think, we Americans, that we're a young, evolving nation.
You're an evolving nation, but not a young one.
I mean, St.
Petersburg is younger, you say, than Boston.
Yeah, it is, yeah.
I mean, Boston's been around for a long time.
Well, that knocked me over.
I'm going to St.
Petersburg for this new book that I'm playing, as Jesus said.
Boston is, that's right, it makes... It's true.
Absolutely true.
I mean, it's the world's oldest democracy.
It's the world's, in other words, it's the world's oldest continuous practitioner of that form.
And the...
You know, the American Revolution well predated the French Revolution, although for some reason, I think partly because of this, you know, sort of idea that Americans have about perpetual renewal, you know, it's still faintly surprising to find that the French Revolution didn't come first.
And this is the classic revolution, of course.
It always makes no sense.
I mean, it's a revolution started by rich men.
I mean, that doesn't... Well, that's not necessary.
You know, I mean, the French Revolution was, to a great extent, instigated by the bourgeoisie, too.
I mean, read Simon Sharma's book on the subject, which caused so much annoyance among certain Marxist critics that it came out of, you know, in 1989's Citizens.
But the, I don't know, I mean, the thing is that, you know, I mean, part of the, actually the greatness of the American Revolution was that it didn't,
plunge this country into Jacobin bloodbaths and so forth.
It functioned far.
I mean, you don't have to have a lot of bloodshed in order to have a revolution.
Well, that's absolutely the case.
You mentioned earlier, at the very beginning, that So-and-so's book has the, gives off the aura of being a lecture.
But I have to say, I have to say that there are moments in the world where I feel this is, that this does...
Well, you can't help it.
It's a very entertaining lecture.
Yeah, but I'd like it to be entertaining, as indeed Clark's was, too.
You know, sort of different generations, different styles and so on.
I mean, you give us our little nuggets, you know, Homer is the greatest American painter of the 19th century.
I love that one about the room with the soil in it.
It doesn't do it justice to reproduce.
It doesn't do it justice to visit it.
Wally de Maria.
And yet, you know, de Maria's lightning field is on the cover of the book.
I think it's fantastic, these lightning fields.
But there's a kind of, you know, dogged dedication that you get in the perpetuation of that thing.
Well, you know, the Dear Foundation was very nice.
It just said we'll maintain it indefinitely.
Periodically, I guess they hop in and weed it or something.
But, I mean, when you see something like that,
purporting itself to be a piece of art there's no purporting it is a piece of art this is our business of whether something purports to be a piece of art or not is a redheading because you know a row of bricks on the museum floor
if it's designated as a work of art, is a work of art.
The same row of bricks in the parking lot outside where it doesn't have the art context to identify it is a row of fucking bricks, you know.
Sidewalk.
Yeah, right.
Well, so what makes it a work of art?
Because somebody says it so?
Yeah, I mean, all I'm arguing is that to say that something is a work of art is not automatically placed in a higher moral or conceptual category than other things in this world.
It just shifts along the question of whether it's
the product of human expression, I guess?
The product of human expression, which is clearly labeled as being such.
Either by its context, it doesn't mean, it doesn't say anything about whether it's great or lousy.
You know, it's like saying, this is a test tube, or this is a rubber ball.
So is this kind of a guiding tenet of yours?
Yeah, but I mean, you know, it's the only, you know, sort of step one to making some kind of sense of, look, I remember when I was a kid,
The first time that I ever got annoyed by a work of art, and I didn't see very many, because one didn't, playing up in a Jesuit boarding school in Sydney, Australia.
But I remember going in 1953, one time it would have been about 15, there was an exhibition of modern European painting at the New South Wales Art Gallery, which is the main museum in Sydney, and one of the things in there was a painting which
oddly enough, belongs to a guy I know in New York now, by Joan Miron.
And it looked totally and absolutely wacky to me.
It looked like an insult to the eye.
I mean, he was the square of burlap with the number 49 painted on it in
And there were a couple of red blobs.
And, you know, it didn't make any rhyme or reason to me.
And I remember looking at it and deeply felt contempt, saying to myself, well, that is not a work of art.
And then I thought, well, if that isn't a work of art, what is a work of art?
And I guess my sort of embryonic thoughts as a future critic started from that point.
You know, to go back earlier to what we say about America not being as old as we might, or as young as we might think, it is the only country of any significant size that is blackened entirely by print, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, Columbus announced it's just in print.
That's right.
So when you think the whole experience,
Yes.
We've been able to examine it, haven't we?
That's right.
And so that is very interesting, isn't it?
And, of course, you know... It's been documented.
You're exactly right.
Not only has it been documented, but, you know, it has been the subject of innumerable replicated and, you know, repeated and disseminated fantasies.
You know, which were much more widely disseminated about America than were about, you know, countries that were, quote, discovered earlier.
And, you know, I mean, part of the European image of America from that day to this has a great deal to do with fantasy, you know, and the... Especially the Indians and the wild west and... Yeah, all that stuff.
Well, of course, that appealed to Americans too.
And, you know, somewhere in the middle of these fantasies, there are cause of truth.
I mean, it is true that there was a wild west and that it once was wild and that, you know, if it was full of Indians, it would have given a very shabby deal.
But see, the...
I think I reproduced somewhere in the book that picture of an artist called Shreveogel painting a western cowboy in his hat pointing a gun at the Shreveogel and he's kneeling on the roof of Shreveogel's studio in Hoboken, New Jersey.
And yet people were quite just as prepared to accept
these late, you know, 19th, early 20th century paintings as a faithful record of life on the western frontier as, you know, they had been earlier to accept, say, debris engravings of cannibal savages of the Caribbean as a faithful record of Amerindian life in the 1540s.
But because
from the standpoint of a critic and historian, you really can't see it whole, can't you?
Well, one would like to try and see it whole, but it's such a vast subject that you can only see it through a particular porthole.
Well, you can track the arc.
Yeah.
I think what you can do is make, you know, make a sort of, in some respects, a parallel narrative, which doesn't work in all cases, which sort of
functions okay between events in American society and events in, you know, for want of a better word, you'd call the American psyche, and the art that these reflect, or the art that reflects them.
I mean, all art is socially grounded, you know, to greater or lesser degrees, and all sorts of stuff seeps into their pictures.
I mean, you wouldn't necessarily have had
that demand for those huge sort of god-struck, optimistic paintings of Western wilderness by Bierstadt and others in the 1860s, if it hadn't been for the great drive of the white man's westward expansion or indeed for that social myth of manifest destiny.
These do connect.
Did you bring any, oh, obviously you brought a degree of baggage to the project.
Well, nobody starts writing as a version.
Obviously, but you wouldn't describe it either as a work of field research and that you're allowed to make this.
No, it's written mainly from secondary sources.
and uh the the you know all the stuff but but but but you have an opinion of certainly the original research if you wish to call it that is you know what i've conducted with me and i over the over the last nearly 30 years i've been living in america but the the i didn't do any original but it is just a relation of attitudes and opinions that they were formed prior to the to doing the project oh absolutely yes but also ones which were formed during
Were there surprises for you?
Yeah, there were surprises as to quality.
I mean, there are quite a number of those.
I mean, for instance, I went into the project not realising what a really good painter, for instance, John Singer Sargent was.
I thought, you know, I tended to share this view that many people had of him that he was a rather slick social portraitist.
I don't think that.
I mean, he was sometimes a slick
remarkably good painter the main thing that although I guess this was part of my original idea for the thing but it certainly strengthened with you know as the project went along was to point out you know like when I started working as a critic in America there was a sort of general feeling diffused throughout the art world which in turn diffused it to the public that
pre-20th century or even pre-World War II American art wasn't as interesting as what happened after.
In other words, that American art really achieved a kind of maturity with abstract expressions in which it hadn't possessed before.
This was the point at which American art became original.
You didn't hold that view.
I didn't hold that view, but nevertheless I was affected by it, and gradually I sort of began to think, well, this actually has to be argued against.
And the... I mean, you must remember that this, you know, the early 70s, at the time when, for instance, the Whitney Museum was selling off its holdings of 19th century American art because they weren't interested in that part of the story, you know.
Amazing, huh?
You know, they were selling their churches and stuff.
They only sell homeless, too.
For all I know.
And the...
You know, I mean, Frederick Church in the early 70s was a total drug on the market.
You know, there were just these big pictures of, you know, mountains and cascades and things, and they were rather dirty and nobody bothered to look at them.
I mean, you know, that big one of his icebergs that made the world record price, I can't remember when, I think at the end of the 70s, was found in the hall of an orphanage in London, you know, and they had the fondest idea of what it was.
The...
To this day, there are still, I think, really exceptionally good American artists who are, in comparison to others, considerably underrated.
I mean, Stuart Davis is an example.
Stuart Davis's reputation, it didn't get blotted out by any means, but it was distinctly occluded by post-war abstract expressionism, you know, for every...
I mean, for every hundred articles that you got on Bill de Kooning in the mid-1970s, you might have seen maybe one on Davis.
And yet he was a really extraordinarily interesting and vigorous and gifted American painter.
Anyway, so I wanted to argue as clearly as I could for a general audience that
First of all, there are long contiguities in American art.
And secondly, right from the time of Copley on, it produced altogether remarkable figures.
I mean, not a huge number of them, but enough to make the trip really worthwhile.
Are there any areas where American art really excels?
I mean, I know you talk about skyscrapers,
Well, you know, if that question means does the, you know, is there one American painter in the 19th century who holds his own or the great ones?
Oh, I think there are quite a few that hold their own.
Well, there are at least a couple who hold their own, namely Aikens and Homer.
And Audubon, if you wish to regard him as a 19th century, well, I mean, he is.
But, you know, did America...
artists of the stature and range of say Delacroix or Ingres or Manet probably not but within his area which is that of a very exacting tough-minded realism there were no French painters who were better than Winslow Homer or
especially Aitken's, really not, I don't think.
How does something like Mary Cassatt fit in?
Well, you see, Mary Cassatt fits in there very well, because after all, she was the one and only American painter who was completely accepted by the French avant-garde of her time.
I mean, admittedly, she came to...
to Paris just a tad late for the origins of Impressionism, but the fact was that she exhibited with the Impressionists.
She was taken with perfect seriousness by them as, you know, an equal, as a colleague.
You know, Degas.
Did it help that she was a she?
It didn't matter that she was a she.
I mean, the thing is that late 19th century Paris was a good deal less
uh, sexually biased with regard to women painters than, um, uh, mid 20th century in New York.
And, uh, the, the, you know, because that whole sort of, uh, you know, primitive notion of machismo and genius didn't really, you know, affect
the French so much.
Well, I like the fact that you... I mean, you know, they had this terrific, you know, this strong regard, for instance, for Rosa Bonheur, who was now not, you know, sort of regarded on the same plane as Cassatt, although, you know, certainly not by me.
But, nevertheless, Bonheur was a big picture of the cellars.
Ah.
Anything else?
Well, they're doing something a little strange this week.
There's a whole special issue of time.
I'll show you.
Certainly Newsweek did a nice thing.
Yeah, I did.
This is 75 pages.
Oh, Jesus.
Wow.
I had to write that whole damn thing.
That's wonderful.
This will be out this week?
This will be out this week.
Excellent.
Where were we?
Rosa Bonheur.
There were quite a number of 19th century French artists who were highly regarded by the French themselves.
I mean, women artists.
The prejudice against women artists is actually much more, I think, an artifact of the 20th and of the 19th century.
Well, it works both ways, too.
I'm pleased that you, you know, discussed Georgia O'Keeffe, for instance, with the history of...
openness you know some of the stuff is really some of the stuff is it sucks it sucks it's right i agree with you sometimes it's sometimes it is you know difficult to deal head on with people who have been made into feminist icons for reasons other than the quality we see this in writing you see yeah and you know we have to accept a book
It's trouble, but... What do you mean?
You're not talking about Maya Angelou, by the chance, are you?
I don't read Maya Angelou, but I'm including her.
Yeah, actually, I am.
In fact, Maya Angelou, to be frank, is the black female Rob McEwan.
That's... But, you know, nobody says so, because then they think that you, I'm sure she does, but, you know, nobody seems prepared to say so, because...
You know, it's thought to be racist and anti-feminist to say so.
But, of course, it's neither of these things.
There's a book that I published last year called Push by this woman named Sapphire, a novel.
And try and whack that book.
Yeah, but also there are a lot of unreadable books by men, too.
I mean, the thing is, I think... I understand.
Yeah.
Probably more, actually.
Yeah, well, probably.
But you're at your own risk, you know, when you... But you see, the thing is, you know...
There is a level of political correctness, a degree of political correctness that does enter art as well as it does with literature.
Well, I think in a way, in some respects, it enters art even more than it does literature, at least in terms of the reception of the artists.
It is a myth that when artists are now discriminated against by the art world, it is simply and flatly a myth.
And the...
In the same way, I mean, nobody in his right mind would assert that women writers are discriminated against by the publishing world.
They are simply not.
No, I think actually they get the better of the breaks.
I don't think they get the better of the breaks.
I don't think they get the worse of the breaks.
It's just that nobody that I know of or that I've heard of has any a priori discrimination against women writers as women.
Well, especially since...
The publishing industry is basically run... Well, it's not basically run by women, but it's to some extent run by women.
I mean, they're in there.
There are an awful lot of women editors, including some really great ones, like Elizabeth Sifton, whom I had the pleasure to work with once.
And nobody is going to think that a book has less market chance...
because it's by a woman than it does, you know, because it's by a man.
I'm surprised by women who tend to buy more novels, though.
Well, that may be so.
Those are marketing decisions, not necessarily artistic ones.
Well, yes, but also, you know, the artistic decisions are taken.
And, you know, I'm extremely glad that there is no such discrimination in the publishing world, even if there once was.
I don't know whether there was or not, but there certainly isn't now.
And in the same way, the, you know, the art market
you know is not going to have any hesitation about giving a woman artist a show but what is I think incontestably true is that the art market is now so overloaded there are so many artists out there that it is correspondingly easy for an overlooked or unsuccessful woman painter who may indeed be
overlooked for just as valid reasons as so many male painters are overlooked, to say, well, this is the result of sexism and, you know, I've hit the glass ceiling and that sort of thing.
But I really don't see much evidence of this.
Well, so it is argued by some people that the, the, the, um, uh, yeah, there was because the French gave us the Statue of Liberty.
It wasn't because the French gave us the Statue of Liberty.
But there was that time that the, the, the, um, you know, there was a strong...
movement towards a kind of genteeling of American culture, you know, in the name of what I guess we would now call family values.
And, you know, that is one of the things that provoked the masculinist reaction embodied by writers like Norris and London, and also, you know, as embodied by...
The Ashcan School, you know, particularly by Bellows.
I mean, you know, these things were naturally all linked, you know.
But, you see, I think that it's more productive if you're looking at a hyper-masculinist artist like Bellows to take him on his own terms rather than to say, ah, here he is painting phallocratic scenes of male conflict.
how wicked and how, you know, improperly this diverts attention from, you know, women artists like Celia Faxter or, you know... I have four... I mean, all the school of genteel lady Impressionists, many of them in Boston.
I mean, you know... Well...
I've often thought of writing in... I find much of it very boring.
Well, I see.
I actually collect Cedar because she's so quaint and dated.
Yes.
And really, I collect it because I have the Island Garden book in first edition with this wonderful child.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
That you have in here.
Oh, well, that's a collector's item.
I have four of them, actually.
Oh, really?
I'm a book guy, and I've... Winslow Homer is a great, great...
I have just about all of his, not all, but certainly all of his Harper's Weekly.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
Most of the ones, all the great ones.
And you really don't get into the graphic art that much of Homer in this book.
No, I don't.
But you have a limited amount of space, you see.
Because it was so, he was the guy.
He was the guy.
Yeah.
No, no, he was a very gifted graphic reporter.
It's absolutely true.
but the um in fact i think the only graphic artist with whom i deal in any length is probably charles dana gibson but you see the history of american graphic art press cartooning and so on and so forth overflowing into the comic strip and into popular art is an enormous subject it's a whole other field it's like photography i couldn't really do justice to photography i mean i had to you know limit my cone of
vision of it because... It's important to point out, I think.
Yeah.
You really didn't do the whole... You really were unable to... Well, how can you fit it all in one book?
I mean, such a book would degenerate really into a kind of telephone directory.
And people don't want to read telephone directories.
And you have to maintain your focus.
You have to maintain your focus.
You have to keep the story tracking.
and just say, look, I'm sorry, there are some things I can't handle, you know, in the same way as, you know, I severely delimited the role that Native American art, Indian art, plays in the book.
I restricted it to the extent to which, to give you examples, the extent to which it had influenced
white European culture in America because I'm not an anthropologist.
I don't have sufficient background or training in that highly specialized and rather contested domain.
I thought it was better just to make it plain than to, you know, go into it and give a, you know, a like one thing.
You do touch on this ephemeral art, like the spiral jetty.
Yeah, yeah.
But it wasn't meant to be ephemeral.
It was meant to stay there forever.
It's just that the lake had other views.
But sandcastles, you know, scare clothes, these kind of things are ephemeral things.
Yeah, sure.
But being ephemeral doesn't mean it's not art.
You know, it can be terrific.
I mean, after all, there are lots of Titians and Rembrandts that turned out to be ephemeral in, you know, between 1939 and 1945.
They just weren't very proof against burning phosphorus.
So do you think you have another huge project like this?
Not for the moment, Madonna.
What do you think I am?
No, absolutely not.
I'm going to, you know, just relax.
I mean, you know, doing the tour has been fairly taxing, let alone, you know, doing the television series and the book and all that stuff.
I...
No, I just want to get the promotion out of the way, see the series onto air in America.
It's coming up shortly, isn't it?
It's coming up actually next week on the 28th.
I'm going to hustle and get this out, get this story out.
Yeah, it goes to air on the 28th.
They're broadcasting it.
in four blocks of two programs each, between 9 and 11 on Wednesday nights.
And it will... So I guess it'll be the 28th and the 4th of June, then the 11th, then the 18th, and that's it.
And then presumably they'll replay it.
But see, it's been up in Australia already and in England.
They liked it.
Oh, they loved it, yeah.
Yeah.
How about the book?
Was it available?
No, no, the book is new.
That hasn't been out there, and the reason why I'm going to Australia in June is partly to promote it in Australia, but just for a week, you know.
Anything I haven't covered that you think... Jesus, I don't know.
I haven't asked you specific questions that I can get out of the book.
That's my job.
Yeah, that's your job.
I believe that.
I was looking for some good quotes, I think.
Nor at this point could I remember everything that's in the book.
It's funny, you know, it's like detox.
I mean, the thing was written with such intensity and, you know, under such pressure.
We're talking about women, though.
Who did women better than Winslow Homer, especially in that?
That's why I guess I brought up the graphic art, those wonderful girls.
Oh, some of the color coach girls are just terrific, aren't they?
You see, he was the great, you know,
reasonably unsentimental recorder of American childhood in an age which was incredibly sentimental about, you know, children, virgins, and, you know, ideal, pure, you know, bonnie Massachusetts damsels.
I mean, nobody could call Homer's eye a particularly, you know, investigatory one, except that it was formally investigatory.
But the, you know, that was why he was so popular.
But he did tell stories, though.
He tells stories.
He was a very, very good narrative painter.
And not all of them are accountable for just in terms of a simple story.
There's a lot of mystery in Homer.
There's a lot of... You know, he's a much deeper painter than people tend to think.
Well, you point that out in the book.
See, when I... Some of the artists of the sea, which is, you know... Which is true.
There were other depths.
Yeah, there certainly were.
And the...
yeah I mean he was the I think the best sea painter practically since Turner and see it's amazing I mean like when I I mean I remember having a conversation when I first arrived in New York in 1970 with this dealer and I said well you know name me some of your favourite American painters and I said well you know blah blah blah blah and Winslow Homer and he looked at me as though oh mad you know he just thought that Homer was the sort of fish illustrator
You know, it's like Audubon.
I mean, Audubon wasn't just a great ornithological artist.
He was a great formal artist, and to core.
I just saw up at Dartmouth, I gave a talk up there last week, and they had four of the five volumes of Audubon.
Of the Birds of America, yeah.
And the fifth they didn't get because Homer stiffed Audubon.
He didn't pay.
So he held back the last one.
Oh, really?
Yeah, I tell that in my book.
It's a great story.
Now Dartmouth only has four out of them.
Oh, shit.
Yeah, it's a great story because he wouldn't pay.
Dartmouth kept sending him bills, and he said, fuck you, I'm not sending you the fifth book.
Oh, my God.
Actually, it was Daniel Webster who was buying them.
These were Daniel Webster's books.
Yes, it sounds more like Daniel Webster's period.
Then actually they went to the Haverhill Public Library.
Funny, funny story.
I'm not going to take up too much more of your time.
You're welcome to if you wish.
Although I think I have a phone coming at some point.
I'm not sure.
You've got your little computer there.
I've got my little computer there.
You have a place out on the Hamptons?
Is that right?
Not in the Hamptons.
It's on Shelter Island.
There's a big difference.
The Hamptons is really expensive.
Shelter Island is sort of redneck-y.
You should be able to get out there now.
One of the papers that I sell to
piece oh yeah right so yeah no i live on shelter i don't always have at least i have for the last 15 years or so and uh the the i keep a place in you in new york city but um you're down in soho right so yeah yeah stephen j gold who has a place no i don't i mean i've met google but i don't really know he has a he has a place there's a lot there
I mean, I got that loft in 1970 when they didn't cost anything.
I don't think I could afford to get one.
We called them cast-iron buildings.
Well, we called them cast-iron buildings.
But Soho wasn't Soho.
I mean, Soho wasn't called Soho until, you know, sort of the mid-'70s, really.
Then it was just a kind of downtown industrial wasteland.
I mean, who ever thought of cast-iron building as being an expression, an artistic expression?
But we do now, don't we?
Of course we do.
And as a matter of fact, its manufacturers also did.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, for instance, the Hogwarts building, which is on the corner of Broadway and, I think, Broome, designed by Daniel Badger and built in, whenever it was, the 1850-something, 57.
You know, it's very consciously artistic.
It was the first American building to
elevators in it so that they could get up you know and you point out quite correctly that was the key that was the key yeah having elevators then that meant that
you know, Mr. Moneybags could get up to his place of work.
And enable the 23rd floor.
That's right, exactly.
But see, the Warburg building was very consciously designed as an artistic event.
I mean, it copied the window patterns and column rhythms and some of the detailing of Sansovino's Liberia Vecchia in Venice.
Oh, no, there was never not... I mean, those buildings were not
They were utilitarian, but not purely so.
And this, too, is a vein that goes through.
I mean, the thing is that American utilitarian architects have, you know, sometimes had a real genius for all of it.
I mean, people talk about, you know, it was a favorite tenet of later modernists that the great Louis Sullivan...
you know, with his form follows function, Dick Dar, you know, was the predecessor of completely unornamented bare glass architecture in America, but the truth of the matter was that he was one of the greatest ornamental detailers that's ever lived, you know, so that, you know, when you look at something like the Carson Peary Scott store in Chicago, you get both bones and skin.
I mean, there's fabulous decoration on the lower part of it, and it enlivens the whole thing, but also...
You see the bones of the building in the expression of the grid on the outside of the upper stories, and the two work beautifully together.
I think we've got plenty of stuff.
Okay, good.
Would you add a couple of books for me?
Absolutely.
The main thing I want the series to do is to actually get people to go and look at the originals, because television is a poor reproductory medium, and nobody can really say that
on TV but you know if you can I mean I would hope it sort of stimulates a desire to go and see the actual things and things is the operative word yeah and things is the operative word you know I mean people people walk past the Chrysler building every day and they don't think about it you know oh to see that in the sunset though oh fabulous the great gilded spire Jesus yeah wonderful that flat iron building down there oh yeah I love that
I love New York, actually.
So do I. And I hate it, too.
Do you want to make a comment on New York or American cities in any way?
Well, you know, I mean, it's the big fish hatchery, isn't it?
You know.
New York and Chicago.
I mean, Boston is more like a cradle, but New York is the... I mean, not to denigrate Boston, but, you know, it's fascinating to come to Boston and see the... Well, you can almost see Boston Hall, really.
Yes, you almost can.
New York is always... I can even walk over there in Hell's Kitchen.
The amazing thing is how fast it changes, you know.
I mean, even in the time that I've been living in the same loft in downtown, you know, for the last 27 years, the whole area has sort of changed.
I mean, some of its fundamental character remains, but it's a very different place to the one that I bought into in 1970, or even in 75.
And, you know, it's become more like a gigantic fucking mall, you know, with all these, you know, I mean, you know, couture houses, I mean, well, you know, sort of mass clothing shops,
It's gone a complete circle.
It used to be that the clothing was manufactured there.
And now, of course, you know, it's manufactured in Taiwan and then, you know, and sold and sold there.
You know, you would go out in the morning and you'd see these great bales.
I mean, it looked, Soho in those days, it looked like the art that was being made in it, minimalism, you know, with those big iron plates on the road and the, you know, these weird-looking bales and offcuts and, you know,
cardboard cartons stacked everywhere, and now it's, you know, this sort of runway for models, you know.
It's not that I've got anything against models.
Well, when I was down there at Stephen Jacobs' house last year, they were shooting a big commercial thing.
I mean, the street was closed, and they had all these crews and stuff.
Tell me about it.
It's an incredible pain in the ass.
I mean, you've got a film crew down there three days, three, four days a week.
Probably in a brassiere spot.
Oh, yeah.
Well, sometimes they're doing feature films, you know, and I must say, I was overcome with, I'd been overcome with jealousy at times when they were making Shock and I'd been making Fatal Eye, American Visions, because
You know, when I think of the conditions we were baking our fucking series under, the entire makeup department consisted of a 79-cent comb, you know, known as the unit comb and carried in the PA's handbag.
And far from having caravans and stuff, you know, we had two vans, you know, crammed with uncomfortable.
And probably one take does it too, right?
Well, no, no, no.
I very seldom go.
I think I only a few times got it done on the first time.
I mean, out of the hundred or so stand-up pieces that I did, you know, I think I only ever really got it right twice on the first take.
And the second time I did it was the very last shot of the series, you know, on top of the...
Tyrell's Rodent Crater.
And, you know, we had this helicopter.
We only had the chopper for one day.
And the shock required that I get the thing absolutely right, and then the chopper takes off and flies over me.
And suffering cats... Don't fuck it up.
Don't fuck it up.
The sun's going down.
You know, it was just disappearing behind that notch.
You know, and I kept on doing my piece and thinking, don't fuck it up, don't fuck it up.
But actually, I didn't fuck it up because...
That's been fun.
Good.
But you know, the whole cost of the series would have bought you about, you know, four million bucks or something.
It would have bought you about two minutes and twenty seconds of Waterworld.
Yeah.
And look how... And look how... What a Waterworld.
What a Waterworld.